resolves # 3923: static site generator page (#3924)
asciidoctor/asciidoctor: docs/modules/ROOT/pages/static-site-generators.adoc

= Static Site Generators

> Asciidoctor fundamentally converts one source document into one output document.

Reviewer: I like the intro structure:

1. Context
2. Problem
3. Solution

To convert more than one document, you need some amount of infrastructure.
Simple situations may find it convenient to use built-in Asciidoctor capabilities or scripts, but are unlikely to be appropriate for any but the smallest sites.

> Static site generators organize the conversion of multiple source documents into a functioning static web site.

Reviewer: Since this is the first occurrence of "Static site generators" we should add the acronym.

"Static site generators (SSG)"

> == What does a Static Site Generator (ssg) do?

Reviewer: We should either use "Static Site Generator" everywhere or use "standard casing" here since the term is used in a section title

Author: I'm not sure what "standard casing" is.  Except for the doctitle, I've changed to lowercase 'static site generator' everywhere and the only 'SSG' is after the first occurrence.

Reviewer: Sorry, the right term seems to be sentence case:

> Sentence case is the conventional way of using capital letters in a sentence or capitalizing only the first word and any proper nouns.

```suggestion
== What does a static site generator do?
```

> == What does a Static Site Generator (ssg) do?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== What is a static site generator?
```

Author: I think the question of what a SSG is is too philosophical for me to answer, and all I could say was "it's something that does X", whereas if I ask what a SSG does, I can just start off explaining X.

> A static site generator (ssg) gathers sources from one or more locations, transforms them, and writes the results into a file system, concrete or virtual, ready for deployment to a web server.

Reviewer: I think that's too much detail for one sentence, maybe:

"creates (or generates) a set of static assets which can be served by a web server)".

I feel like the "virtual/concrete file system" part is too specific/technical.

Author: yes....
`A static site generator gathers sources from one or more locations, transforms them, and organizes the resulting static assets into a complete site ready for deployment directly to a web server.`?

Reviewer: Yes that's better!
Still a bit convoluted but let's hear what others think :wink:

> Typical source locations are the local file system, remote Git repositories, and artifact repositories such as those used by Maven, e.g. Nexus.

Reviewer: Maybe the specific example about Maven should be inside parenthesis?

The most common transformations are converting source from text representations such as AsciiDoc or Markdown to HTML and embedding the results in additional HTML markup to supply a site theme and navigation.
Other transformations include generating diagram images from text sources and optimizing images.

> Mavigation resources can be generated from explicit source or automatically.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Navigation resources can be generated from explicit source or automatically.
```

Author: Thanks!

Some static site generators include features specifically targeted to particular website styles such as blogs.

== What is Asciidoctor's role in static site generation?

> Asciidoctor is used in static site generators to transform source documents in Asciidoc into html.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Asciidoctor is used in static site generators to transform source documents in AsciiDoc into HTML.
```

Author: thanks!

> Most usually this is simply embedded in "outer html" supplied by a template, but it can also be further transformed, as done by nav file processing in Antora.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Usually the content is embedded in "outer html" supplied by a template, but it can also be further transformed, as done by nav file processing in Antora.
```

Reviewer: I don't think we should mention Antora at this point. If you are not familiar with SSG you are probably not familiar with Antora so this does not help.

Reviewer 2: I agree, though I think it would be fair to say somewhere that AsciiDoc is usually use for the main page content, but can be used in other, novel ways by the SSG.

Reviewer: Yes that's a good idea.
What you suggested could replace this sentence:

"AsciiDoc is usually use for the main page content, but can be used in other, novel ways by the SSG."

We could even mention that some SSGs are using AsciiDoc to define navigation between pages.

Author: How about...
"Asciidoctor is used in static site generators to transform source documents in AsciiDoc into HTML.
Usually this is embedded in "outer HTML" supplied by a template to produce an output page.
Some static site generators also use specific AsciiDoc input for novel purposes, such as to generate navigation resources."

Header attributes beginning with `page-` are made available as variables in the template system.
The UI bundle may contain additional Javascript helper functions that can access variables from the page as well as global context information.

Antora does not support multi-language sites and support is not amenable to implementation through an extension.

Antora does not support blog-like sites natively but support can easily be added through the extension mechanism.

=== xref:jekyll-integration::index.adoc[Jekyll integration]

The Asciidoctor Jekyll integration (Ruby) consists of a Jekyll plugin that uses Asciidoctor to transform source to HTML.

Jekyll supports sources from a single file system tree.
There is limited location mapping support using a `permalink` page variable.

Layout templates, in the `Liquid` template system, are part of a Jekyll site project.
Header attributes beginning with `page-` are made available to the template system.

Jekyll does not support multi-language sites in any obvious way.

Jekyll has some native blog support, although this does not affect it's use of Asciidoctor.

> === xref:maven-tools::index.adoc[Maven-tools]

Reviewer 3: Do we want to mention maven specifically, maybe better a generinc last section like "Build tools" explainig the shortcomings of those in general?
For name some example content "they help to aggregate and build sets of sources, manage resources(images, etc) locations, but not handle internal links, navigation (menus), etc."

Author: Hmmmm.... This was intended to list the SSGs specifically associated with Asciidoctor.  Are there any other build tools that provide an attempt at Asciidoctor integration that integrates with some sort of site building behavior?
How about adding a phrase like "in common with other build tools that can incidentally generate sites,...."? (I haven't tried to fit that in anywhere yet.)

Reviewer 2: I would make the case that the Gradle plugin does as well. It's not a 1-to-1 match with the Maven site generation, but it can be be effectively used for this purpose.

Author: I've  investigated the Gradle plugin a bit and added a paragraph.... I'd like the maven tools and gradle plugin maintainers to review in case I've missed something obvious.

However, it appears that all uses are page-by-page with no possibility of communicating information about the set of pages.

Using suitable maven plugins it's possible to pull sources in as artifacts from a maven repository.

There appears to be no way to use document header attributes as template variables.

=== https://github.com/middleman/middleman-asciidoc[Middleman integration]

The Asciidoctor Middleman integration (Ruby) consists of a Middleman plugin that uses Asciidoctor to transform source to HTML.

Configuration of Middleman is done through ruby scripting.

Middleman supports sources from a single file system tree.
It is possible to install an extension providing limited location mapping support using a `permalink` page variable.

Layout templates are part of a Middleman site project.
Header attributes beginning with `page-` are made available to the template system.

Middleman does not support multi-language sites in any obvious way.

Middleman has some native blog support, although this does not affect it's use of Asciidoctor.

=== Unaffiliated site generators

> A list of site generators using Asciidoctor in some capability is maintained https://gist.github.com/briandominick/e5754cc8438dd9503d936ef65fffbb2d[here].

Reviewer 2: I'm a little hesitate about linking to this gist, though I don't have a good alternative suggestion. So perhaps it's the best resource we have. Perhaps we can say this is a community-maintained reference.
